---
layout: post
title: "a singular crowd"
image: true
image_name: "airmail"
tag: "essay"
---

READER DISCRETION: boy who only recently became sentient opines about the experience. If you are jaded or not highly online or dislike the first book from young authors, please be advised.

---

I think there's some kind of internal step-change that happens in the transition from teen to adult where you are forced to reconcile with your sense-of-self. It has something to do with agency. With the realization that you can just _do_ stuff. And the fact that externalizing and developing your sense-of-self necessarily requires doing stuff and is not some passively emergent thing. 

You need to put energy into a system to reverse entropy. Anything that is not just rotting and involves imposing order and structure on your life is hard and requires energy. People who seem singular in some aspect almost certainly spent many many hours of focused effort developing said aspect. So the step-change occurs when someone – either consciously or not – starts channeling considerable energy into shaping themself[^1].

This is probably somewhat of a truism. You could (rudely) boil it down to "people behave differently when they try to behave differently", so I'm not going to spend much more time on this. But I did have to realize that the person I view as effortlessly cool and authentic needed to spend hours scrolling online or digging through community thrift buckets to find those sunglasses that so perfectly tread the line between on-trend and weird and just _work_ on them. That "effortlessly cool" is paradoxical. That you will most likely never bear witness to the long nights that shape a soul.

We all know someone 

For those also into internet anthropology, there's an essay by Max Read on his neologism "[The Zynternet](https://maxread.substack.com/p/hawk-tuah-and-the-zynternet)": a newly emergent internet subculture composed of "fratty, horndog, boorishly provocative 20- and sometimes (embarrassingly) 30-somethings–mostly but by no means entirely male". The reactions also cite "brat summer"

taxonomy of internet subcultures

people are not unique on any one axis, but in the n-dimensional space points are incredibly sparse.

fashion bros

self-optimization

gwern essay on internet subcultures

[1]: I have a theory that people with an early developed sense-of-self had some catalyst/traumatic event to kickstart them, but am currently lacking data to validate!!